was the worst?
Out of the blue would come a request.
Got to have $2,000 for a piece of machinery here that broke down.
Otherwise, we'll endanger a half a million dollars worth of research.
So I'm OK, fine.
I sent them over $2,000.
At the end of the year, when we had turned in a report from the Coordinating Board,
especially to the legislature.
I called up Al Cotton and I said, Al, remember the $2,000?
Can you write something to tell the people of the state how you used that money?
And he said, oh, I couldn't have known.
You know, that was really irritating.
That's the science, at least you mentioned.
Chemistry.
What about vet medicine?
Good, good relationship.
Al Price, Greek guy.
And did that change with George Shelton when he came?
I was probably dealing less and less over the years with vet medicine.
And so I knew Al Price and Shelton just as members of the research committee.
What about science?
Science, that was a tough one to do.
The MD Anderson people wanted to come up and irradiate people in the psychotron.
And they had to do it at certain times and so on.
And many of the experiments done in the psychotron, in physics and chemistry,
required 48 to 72 hours, because it's a statistical thing.
You've got to gather all the players that you see, and then see whether they make any sense of it.
And so it was really an inconvenience for the science people to have MD Anderson take up some time for patients.
I became the coordinator.
trying to coordinate the business.
The doctors, the medical doctors would be an arrogant bunch.
They thought there was no higher calling than to try to save lives.
Please make dying a little less traumatic.
And of course, we are a typical, arrogant,
I'd ask him, you know, could you write me something to explain to the legislature what you did?
Oh, I never could do it.
They never would understand.
I can't do it.
Those two guys sitting across the table with other representatives, you know, every time we had a meeting, a scheduling meeting, they were glaring at each other.
But after about a year of these meetings,
As you look back on those years do you remember any key
research decisions that made here on the campus either by an individual or an organization that you can see in hindsight those were important a direction for it to go an area of emphasis
All that contact research ended in 1983.
I don't think of it anymore.
All right.
What about any big research contractor grant that proved to be significant?
Well, again, there's probably many of them.
I could have rattled off 13, 15 years ago.
All right, you came back then to the department in 83, and you had been away then for a good while.
Had the department grown in your absence?
No, the department was quite stable.
We had hires that we discouraged because there were people in and out for some of the years.
It really hadn't changed much.
And today, as far as you know, what is the size of the department in terms of faculty?
It's probably decreased a little bit because we've had seven or eight retirements in the last five or six years.
And they made the decision.
I guess they'll look at what's made the decision probably.
I agree with you.
That doesn't build a reputation.
We've got the 10-year review and that sort of thing.
It's going to take years.
Oh, yes.
Fortunately, some of them have turned out great.
There's no guarantee.
As you look back on these 30 years, who do you think nationally would be the most recognized geologist here in your 30 years, other than yourself?
Well, John Handler.
He had a tremendous reputation.
What was his specialty?
The rock mechanics.
He was the leader of the rock mechanics group.
He never did any of the work.
He raised the money.
But his name went on everything.
So he would be thought of as the pioneer of geological rock mechanics and so on.
Who else?
Well, I don't think there is anybody.
If we were to poll geology major undergraduates down in the last 30 years, who would they say were the best teachers?
Travis Clark.
What courses did Travis teach?
Oh, he taught petroleum geology years ago.
Taught them how to contour maps.
That sounds like it.
and exercise it, not very rewarding.
But it taught these kids to look at the detail and be very careful and make recommendations based only on what they could see and bring.
So he was a good teacher.
Were there other key teachers?
Fred Smith was a good teacher.
I had that rapport with the freshmen, finally, after they got to be about 20 years old.
They realized Fred was...
In your own case, which of your discoveries, publications are you most proud?
Well, frankly, I have a couple of landmark papers, some which I did when I was still in the industry.
And
There's still another one which I wrote in 1975 on capillary pressures.
That's another one that's still being referenced.
Now, what was the first one?
You didn't mention it by name.
Mountain plank structure in Wyoming.
And I think about every 10 years I turned out something that was really important.
I published it.
nationally today uh... where would our program in geology be right do you have any idea
Harvard will always be thought of as the top school in anything.
And that's because most of the PhDs turned out up to about 20, 25 years before Harvard PhDs or Princeton or something.
And a lot of those rankings, I don't think, makes any sense at all.
Who else in the nation is strong in rock mechanics?
Nobody now.
So we're...
They kind of gave it up.
Okay.
The thing fell apart.
The reason it did was it got popular and everybody started squeezing rocks themselves.
The reason is he ran out of ideas.
They didn't have theoreticians.
This is what they needed.
Looking back on it.
Tony and I talk about this all the time.
What you need to have a successful program in science of any type, you've got to have at least one theoretician that does nothing but sit and think and say, now this is what we should do.
On the other hand, tectonophysics, to put it crudely, first they squeeze blocks of rock.
Looking back over these 30 years, can you think of any direction A&M might have gone to add to its reputation that it did not?
Was there an opportunity there that we might have missed?
Well, you can't do everything.
No, I know.
And so I think that it comes down ultimately to the rural group.
We wanted a strong structural geology, rock mechanics.
We wanted strength in petroleum and engineering geology.
Those three.
We've got a couple of geochemists around, too.
They're good people.
But you can't make a...
If I were today interested in studying rock mechanics and for some reason I didn't come to A&M, where else would I be best advised to go?
Well, you'd have to look up in the literature to see if you should go.
In graduate school, I think you should go
My own school, the University of Minnesota, has been this way for about 30 years now.
They don't go out in the field anymore.
And in 1972 I was on a lecture tour and I stopped in Minnesota and gave the lecture, and it was unresolved.
And after my lecture a few people hung around and they drifted off and finally two had been waiting very patiently to talk to me.
All right, now there's an area of emphasis.
Are you, you believe that A&M should emphasize the practical?
Oh, yes.
Okay.
Are there some others that are emphasizing the practical around the country also?
Well, Colorado School of Mines.
Okay.
And I'm assuming that the schools that have a strong petroleum engineering program might likely have a...
But not necessarily.
Not necessarily.
Okay.
Engineers don't often realize that rocks are their problem.
And what are you working on these days?
Stuff like that.
Okay.
How oil gets out of the source rock and migrates into the factory from which it can produce it.
And primarily in this region of the world.
And so back to your coming here.
You.
where you had never visited A&M before the job opportunity came.
And the associate dean, when he called, he knew you by reputation, but not personally.
And there was not a search committee.
No.
What was your impression of the community as a place to live?
It was tough.
We had to cross the risky bridge.
No, let's see.
You all lived in College Station or Bryan?
In Bryan.
And your first housing?
Chicken fried steak.
There you go.
The finest place you could go outside of the Briarcrest Country.
And what did you all rent when you first?
We rented for a year.
And what did it cost?
Do you remember?
Ours was $85 a month.
We rented a house in 1959.
We bought our house on Brookside there for $22,000.
It was owned by Bill Roman.
It had been built by a professor of English by the name of Middleton.
Have you ever known him?
Just a name.
Your annual.
But I'll bet you could probably make a profit on selling it today.
Yes, yes.
Now, did you, as a non-Texan, did you have any trouble feeling accepted?
No, I didn't.
The reason is my sister, who's 10 years older than I am,
I got married and moved to Houston in 1939.
I frequently visited down there, so I knew something about Houston.
I knew how to pronounce T-U-A-M. That's T-U-A-M. My brother-in-law was
He was sort of a self-taught metalurgist.
He finished all the course work with the film engineer, and he and a friend of his, they first started out reclaiming motor oil.
This was in the early 30s.
And as you can imagine, finally their laboratory, which was in a garage, burned down.
And so they moved to Houston, and they got into the heat treating business, which was a tremendous business in those days, because pump liners were all well punched.
They were always being scored by the sand that was going up.
So you had to go heat treat and re-fit your pump liners and all that in a couple weeks.
So the first house that they bought outside of that area.
It was way out in the country by the University of Houston.
Well, let's see.
Let's draw this to a conclusion.
As you look back on these years at A&M, how would you describe the progress that this institution has made in the last 30 years?
Oh, I think it's tremendous.
A&M is where it is.
Let's quit on that.
Thank you.
...were purchased with the income from this modest endowment.
Again, my appreciation.
Paragraph, again, my appreciation for the honor I feel in being able to serve with you on the Schreiner, at Schreiner.
Sincerely, end of letter.
The achievement of its graduates.
Paragraph, the true measurement of Austin College quality is not
ACT scores, top 10% of high school class rank, but the level of achievement which its graduates make decade after decade.
Why would it not be appropriate to have here in
the new student center maps which show the geographic home in some color coded fashion by counties and states of the current enrollment which would show that you come from a wide variety of places and then similarly place the alumni
on a different set of maps to show that people go from here to careers of success in service all across the world.
Already this college is making a good mark, has been earning a fine reputation for its commitment to international learning and understanding.
Would it be appropriate for Austin College to consider the requirement of the speaking of a second language as one of its normal graduation requirements?
Is it not likely that every one of today's students will live in a much more internationalized world
so that the ability to communicate in a second language will be an additional skill just like the technology of the computer that will open more doors and lead to greater success than the ability simply
to pass another three hour course in our academic major.
Paragraphs.
So on this day, as we pause and look around us, let us hope that this is truly a place of beginning, a time to catch our breath, pause,
and prepare new dreams, set new goals, and anchor our hopes with clear vision and dreams of success.
so that when a similar group gathers 50 years from now to celebrate the 200th birthday, they might smile when we conclude our view of our hopes.
by saying you ain't seen nothing yet.
The best is yet to come.